---
layout: post
title: Dóde ta ...
---

Kónde un pesoa ta *dóde* ta skrevê, el tita skrevê txeu, el ta okupóde ke sê skritura.
Algen *dóde* ta kemê tita kemê txeu, ta konsentróde na sê kemida.

Ess frase ten signifikóde y gramátika kuase igual a "tude ta ＿" ô "so ta ＿".

(Spiá kel asénte drete: é *dóde*, é nê *dode*.)

# Pronúnsia

| dóde | [dót]

# Etimologia (pt)

*Dar* em português tem um significado muito similar:

> - Fazer algo com dedicação ou muita atenção ou concentração (ex.: acho que nos demos completamente a este projecto; nunca se deu aos estudos)[^1]

A diferença está mais na gramática: *ta dóde ta (verbo)*, como se fosse *\*estar dado a (verbo inf.)*, em vez de *se dar a (substantivo)*.

[^1]: "dar", in Dicionário Priberam da Língua Portuguesa [em linha], 2008-2020, [https://dicionario.priberam.org/dar](https://dicionario.priberam.org/dar) [consultado em 11-06-2020].


# (en)

This is a way to say that someone is busy doing something, doing a lot of it, putting their all into it.

It has a very similar meaning and grammar to the more straightforward phrases "tude ta ＿" ("always" doing ＿) and "so ta ＿" ("only" doing ＿),
which are practically all synonyms of each other.

It comes from the Portuguese word *dar*, which means "give", but in both languages really has a ton of different uses and meanings.
(In that sense it's like the Portuguese equivalent of English "do", just based on "give" instead of "act".)
So it looks a little like "given to ＿ing" in English,
but in Kriole instead it means that someone is currently putting all their effort and focus into what it is that they're doing.

Don't confuse *dóde* with *dode* (meaning crazy)!

---